Add athena ref page (#5961)
dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/reference/resource-configs/athena-configs.md

By default, the materialization keeps the last 4 table versions,but you can change it by setting `versions_to_keep`.

```sql
{{ config(
    materialized='table',
    ha=true,
    format='parquet',
    table_type='hive',
    partitioned_by=['status'],
    s3_data_naming='table_unique'
) }}

select 'a' as user_id,
       'pi'     as user_name,
       'active' as status
union all
select 'b'        as user_id,
       'sh'       as user_name,
       'disabled' as status
```

#### HA known issues

- There could be a little downtime when swapping from a table with partitions to a table without (and the other way around). If higher performance is needed, consider bucketing instead of partitions.
- By default, Glue "duplicates" the versions internally, so the last two versions of a table point to the same location.
- It's recommended to set `versions_to_keep` >= 4, as this will avoid having the older location removed.

### Update glue data catalog

> Persist resource descriptions as column and relation comments to the glue data catalog, and meta as [glue table properties](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/glue/latest/dg/tables-described.html#table-properties) and [column parameters](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/glue/latest/webapi/API_Column.html). By default, documentation persistence is disabled, but it can be enabled for specific resources or groups of resources as needed.

Author: ```suggestion
You can persist your column and model level descriptions to the Glue Data Catalog as [glue table properties](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/glue/latest/dg/tables-described.html#table-properties) and [column parameters](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/glue/latest/webapi/API_Column.html). To enable this, set the configuration to `true` as shown in the following examples. By default, documentation persistence is disabled, but it can be enabled for specific resources or groups of resources as needed.
```

> You can persist your column and model level descriptions to the Glue Data Catalog as [glue table properties](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/glue/latest/dg/tables-described.html#table-properties) and [column parameters](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/glue/latest/webapi/API_Column.html). To enable this, set the configuration to `true` as shown in the following examples. By default, documentation persistence is disabled, but it can be enabled for specific resources or groups of resources as needed.

Author: ```suggestion
You can persist your column and model level descriptions to the Glue Data Catalog as [glue table properties](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/glue/latest/dg/tables-described.html#table-properties) and [column parameters](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/glue/latest/webapi/API_Column.html). To enable this, set the configuration to `true` as shown in the following example. By default, documentation persistence is disabled, but it can be enabled for specific resources or groups of resources as needed.
```

- `merge`: Conditionally updates, deletes, or inserts rows into an Iceberg table. Used in combination with `unique_key`.It is only available when using Iceberg.

### On schema change

The `on_schema_change` option reflects changes of the schema in incremental models. The values you can set this to are:

- `ignore` (default)
- `fail`
- `append_new_columns`
- `sync_all_columns`

To learn more, refer to [What if the columns of my incremental model change](/docs/build/incremental-models#what-if-the-columns-of-my-incremental-model-change).

### Iceberg

The adapter supports table materialization for Iceberg.

For example:

```sql
{{ config(
    materialized='table',
    table_type='iceberg',
    format='parquet',
    partitioned_by=['bucket(user_id, 5)'],
    table_properties={
     'optimize_rewrite_delete_file_threshold': '2'
     }
) }}

select 'A'          as user_id,
       'pi'         as name,
       'active'     as status,
       17.89        as cost,
       1            as quantity,
       100000000    as quantity_big,
       current_date as my_date
```

Iceberg supports bucketing as hidden partitions. Use the `partitioned_by` config to add specific bucketing
conditions.

> Iceberg supports these table formats for data : `PARQUET`, `AVRO` and `ORC`.

Author: ```suggestion
Iceberg supports the `PARQUET`, `AVRO` and `ORC` table formats for data .
```

> To use Iceberg incrementally, use one of the following supported strategies:

Author: ```suggestion
The following are the supported strategies for using Iceberg incrementally:
```

- `append`: New records are appended to the table (this can lead to duplicates).

> - `merge`: Perform an update and insert (and optional delete), where new and existing records are added. It is only available with Athena engine version 3.

Author: ```suggestion
- `merge`: Perform an update and insert (and optional delete) where new and existing records are added. This is only available with Athena engine version 3.
```

>   - `unique_key`(required): Columns defining a unique source and target table record.

Author: ```suggestion
  - `unique_key`(required): Columns that define a unique source and target table record.
```

>   - `incremental_predicates` (optional): SQL conditions that enable custom join clauses in the merge statement. This can

Author: ```suggestion
  - `incremental_predicates` (optional): The SQL conditions that enable custom join clauses in the merge statement. This helps improve performance via predicate pushdown on target tables. 
```

>     help improve performance via predicate pushdown on the target table.

Author: ```suggestion
```

>   - `delete_condition` (optional): SQL condition used to identify records that should be deleted.

Author: ```suggestion
  - `delete_condition` (optional): SQL condition that identifies records that should be deleted.
```

>   - `update_condition` (optional): SQL condition used to identify records that should be updated.

Author: ```suggestion
  - `update_condition` (optional): SQL condition that identifies records that should be updated.
```

>   - `insert_condition` (optional): SQL condition used to identify records that should be inserted.

Author: ```suggestion
  - `insert_condition` (optional): SQL condition that identifies records that should be inserted.
```

---
title: "Amazon Athena configurations"

> description: "Reference guide for the Amazon Athena adapter for dbt Core and dbt Cloud."

Author: ```suggestion
description: "Reference article for the Amazon Athena adapter for dbt Core and dbt Cloud."
```

- [Enable](#table-configuration) LF tags management with the `lf_tags_config` parameter. By default, it's disabled. 
- Once enabled, LF tags are updated on every dbt run.
- First, all lf-tags for columns are removed to avoid inheritance issues.
- Then, all redundant lf-tags are removed from tables and actual tags from table configs are applied.
- Finally, lf-tags for columns are applied.

It's important to understand the following points:

- dbt doesn't manage `lf-tags` for databases
- dbt doesn't manage Lake Formation permissions

That's why it's important to take care of this yourself or use an automation tool such as terraform and AWS CDK. For more details, refer to:

* [terraform aws_lakeformation_permissions](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/aws/latest/docs/resources/lakeformation_permissions)
* [terraform aws_lakeformation_resource_lf_tags](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/aws/latest/docs/resources/lakeformation_resource_lf_tags)

## Python models

The adapter supports Python models using [`spark`](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/athena/latest/ug/notebooks-spark.html).

> ### Setup

Author: ```suggestion
### Prerequisites
```

---
title: "Amazon Athena configurations"
id: "athena-configs"

> ---

Reviewer: should `description:` be added to the front matter?

## Models

### Table configuration

| Parameter | Default | Description |
|-----------|---------|-------------|

> | `external_location` | None | The full S3 path to where the table will be saved. Only works with incremental models. Doesn't work with Hive table with `ha` set to `true`. |

Reviewer: - sugg: rewording first sentence so it's active voice (vs passive) 
- sugg: is the indefinite article missing in the 3rd sentence?

> | `external_location` | None | The full S3 path to where the table will be saved. Only works with incremental models. Doesn't work with Hive table with `ha` set to `true`. |

Author: ```suggestion
| `external_location` | None | The full S3 path to where the table is saved. It only works with incremental models. It doesn't work with Hive tables with `ha` set to `true`. |
```

> | `partitioned_by` | None | An array list of columns by which the table will be partitioned. Currently limited to 100 partitions. |

Reviewer: suggs:
- active voice for first sentence. maybe something like "Partitions the table by the... "
- second sentence reads like an incomplete sentence

Author: I'm trying to keep these as tight as possible since they're in a table. We do this elsewhere in the docs as well but I'll try to expand.

> | `bucketed_by` | None | An array list of the columns to bucket data. Ignored if using Iceberg |

Reviewer: i'm not sure i understand the description of this parameter. is the user supposed to specify a list (as an array) or specify a number?

> | `bucket_count` | None | The number of buckets for bucketing your data. Ignored if using Iceberg |

Reviewer: sugg: incomplete sentence

```suggestion
| `bucket_count` | None | The number of buckets for bucketing your data. This parameter is ignored if using Iceberg. |
```

> | `table_type` | Hive | The type of table. Supports `hive` or `iceberg` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `table_type` | Hive | The type of table. Supports `hive` or `iceberg`. |
```

| `ha` | False | Build the table using the high-availability method. Only available for Hive tables. |

> | `format` | Parquet | The data format for the table. Supports `ORC`, `PARQUET`, `AVRO`, `JSON`, and `TEXTFILE` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `format` | Parquet | The data format for the table. Supports `ORC`, `PARQUET`, `AVRO`, `JSON`, and `TEXTFILE`. |
```

> | `write_compression` | None | The compression type for any storage format that allows compressions. See [CREATE TABLE AS][#create-table-as] for available options |

Reviewer: this link is not working, so just wondering if there are plans to add this as a new section

> | `field_delimeter` | None | Custome field delimiter for when the format is set to `TEXTFIRE` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `field_delimeter` | None | Specify the custom field delimiter to use when the format is set to `TEXTFIRE`. |
```

> | `table_properties` | N/A | The tabe properties to add to the table. For Iceberg only. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `table_properties` | N/A | The table properties to add to the table. This is only for Iceberg. |
```

| `unique_tmp_table_suffix` | False | Replace the "__dbt_tmp table" suffix with a unique UUID for incremental models using insert overwrite on Hive tables. |
| `temp_schema` | None | Defines a schema to hold temporary create statements used in incremental model runs. Scheme will be created in the models target database if it does not exist. |
| `lf_tags_config` | None | [AWS Lake Formation](#aws-lake-formation-integration) tags to associate with the table and columns. Existing tags will be removed. <br />* `enabled` (`default=False`) whether LF tags management is enabled for a model <br />* `tags` dictionary with tags and their values to assign for the model <br /> * `tags_columns` dictionary with a tag key, value and list of columns they must be assigned to |
| `lf_inherited_tags` | None | List of the Lake Formation tag keys that are to be inherited from the database level and shouldn't be removed during the assignment of those defined in `ls_tags_config`. |
| `lf_grants` | None | Lake Formation grants config for `data_cell` filters. |

> 

Reviewer: for the rest of the table above, i understood what the descriptions were saying but there are many grammatical errors (e.g. missing periods, spelling errors, incomplete sentences, etc) so suggest checking for that in your next iteration

Author: We frequently use briefer language in the tables to keep them condensed but I'll be on the lookout for the punctuation.

#### Configuration examples

<File name="models/schema.yml">

```sql
{{
  config(
    materialized='incremental',
    incremental_strategy='append',
    on_schema_change='append_new_columns',
    table_type='iceberg',
    schema='test_schema',
    lf_tags_config={
          'enabled': true,
          'tags': {
            'tag1': 'value1',
            'tag2': 'value2'
          },
          'tags_columns': {
            'tag1': {
              'value1': ['column1', 'column2'],
              'value2': ['column3', 'column4']
            }
          },
          'inherited_tags': ['tag1', 'tag2']
    }
  )
}}
```
</File>

<File name='dbt_project.yml' >

```yaml
  +lf_tags_config:
    enabled: true
    tags:
      tag1: value1
      tag2: value2
    tags_columns:
      tag1:
        value1: [ column1, column2 ]
    inherited_tags: [ tag1, tag2 ]
```

</File>

> Lake Formation grants: 

Reviewer: since there's a short description for this code block, should the two code blocks above also have it for consistency/parallel construction?

Author: @amychen1776 Ideas as to what that should be?

            'filters': {
                'filter_name': {
                    'row_filter': '<filter_condition>',
                    'principals': ['principal_arn1', 'principal_arn2']
                }
            }
        }
    }
```

- `lf_tags` and `lf_tags_columns` configs support only attaching lf tags to corresponding resources.
- We recommend managing LF Tags permissions somewhere outside dbt. For example, [terraform](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/aws/latest/docs/resources/lakeformation_permissions) or [aws cdk](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cdk/api/v1/docs/aws-lakeformation-readme.html).
- `data_cell_filters` management can't be automated outside dbt because the filter can't be attached to the table which doesn't exist. Once you `enable` this config, dbt will set all filters and their permissions during every dbt run. Such approach keeps the actual state of row level security configuration actual after every dbt run and apply changes if they occur: drop, create, update filters and their permissions.
- Any tags listed in `lf_inherited_tags` should be strictly inherited from the database level and never overridden at the table and column level

> - Currently `dbt-athena` does not differentiate between an inherited tag association and an override of same it made previously

Reviewer: this bulleted list seems out of place for this section called "Configuration examples". does it make sense to have it live somewhere else or a new section (maybe called "Considerations" or something)?

> - Currently `dbt-athena` does not differentiate between an inherited tag association and an override of same it made previously

Reviewer: to clean this bulleted list up a bit, suggest checking it for grammatical errors (e.g. missing periods, spelling errors, incomplete sentences, etc) in your next iteration

> >   - For example,  If an inherited tag is overridden by an `lf_tags_config` value in one DBT run, and that override is removed prior to a subsequent run, the prior override will linger and no longer be encoded anywhere (in e.g. Terraform where the inherited value is configured nor in the DBT project where the override previously existed but now is gone)

Reviewer: this blockquote seems out of place in this bulleted list, is it a typo?

> >   - For example,  If an inherited tag is overridden by an `lf_tags_config` value in one DBT run, and that override is removed prior to a subsequent run, the prior override will linger and no longer be encoded anywhere (in e.g. Terraform where the inherited value is configured nor in the DBT project where the override previously existed but now is gone)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>   - For example,  If an inherited tag is overridden by an `lf_tags_config` value in one dbt run, and that override is removed prior to a subsequent run, the prior override will linger and no longer be encoded anywhere (in e.g. Terraform where the inherited value is configured nor in the dbt project where the override previously existed but now is gone)
```

### Table location

> The saved location a table is determined by the following conditions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The saved location of a table is determined by the following conditions:
```

1. If `external_location` is defined, that value is used.
2. If `s3_data_dir` is defined, the path is determined by that and `s3_data_naming`.
3. If `s3_data_dir` is not defined, data is stored under `s3_staging_dir/tables/`.

> 

Reviewer: how come a numbered list is used here instead of a bulleted list? 

if there's an order of precedence, suggest mentioning that in the sentence above. if not, suggest bullets instead

Author: Conditions are in order of priority!

The following options are available for `s3_data_naming`:

- `unique`: `{s3_data_dir}/{uuid4()}/`
- `table`: `{s3_data_dir}/{table}/`
- `table_unique`: `{s3_data_dir}/{table}/{uuid4()}/`
- `schema_table`: `{s3_data_dir}/{schema}/{table}/`
- `s3_data_naming=schema_table_unique`: `{s3_data_dir}/{schema}/{table}/{uuid4()}/`

> It's possible to set the `s3_data_naming` globally in the target profile, or overwrite the value in the table config or setting up the value for groups of model in dbt_project.yml.

Reviewer: sugg starting sentence with: "You can set .... " 

sugg checking the rest of the sentence for grammar

Author: We should avoid using "you can" but will fix grammar!

> Note: when using a workgroup with a default output location configured, `s3_data_naming` and any configured buckets are ignored and the location configured in the workgroup is used.

Reviewer: does this deserve to be in a note callout? 

also, sugg converting to active voice

### Incremental models

The following [incremental models](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/incremental-models) strategies are supported:

> - `insert_overwrite` (default): The insert overwrite strategy deletes the overlapping partitions from the destination table, and then inserts the new records from the source. This strategy depends on the `partitioned_by` keyword! If no partitions are defined, dbt will fall back to the `append` strategy.

Reviewer: suggs for conciseness, present tense, style guide stuff, etc.

```suggestion
- `insert_overwrite` (default) &mdash; Deletes the overlapping partitions from the destination table and inserts the new records from the source. This strategy depends on the `partitioned_by` keyword. If no partitions are defined, dbt uses the `append` strategy instead.
```

> - `append`: Insert new records without updating, deleting or overwriting any existing data. There might be duplicate data (e.g. great for log or historical data).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `append` &mdash; Inserts new records without updating, deleting, or overwriting any existing data. There could be duplicate data, which is useful for logs and historical data.
```

> - `merge`: Conditionally updates, deletes, or inserts rows into an Iceberg table. Used in combination with `unique_key`.Only available when using Iceberg.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `merge`&mdash; Conditionally updates, deletes, or inserts rows into an Iceberg table. This strategy is used in combination with `unique_key` and is only available when using Iceberg.
```

> - `merge`: Conditionally updates, deletes, or inserts rows into an Iceberg table. Used in combination with `unique_key`.Only available when using Iceberg.

Reviewer: regarding `Conditionally` , might be worth describing what that means

### On schema change

> `on_schema_change` is an option to reflect changes of schema in incremental models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `on_schema_change` option reflects changes of the schema in incremental models. The values you can set this to are:
```

> The following options are supported:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- `ignore` (default)
- `fail`
- `append_new_columns`
- `sync_all_columns`

> For details, please refer to the [incremental models](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/incremental-models#what-if-the-columns-of-my-incremental-model-change) article.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn more, refer to [What if the columns of my incremental model change](/docs/build/incremental-models#what-if-the-columns-of-my-incremental-model-change).
```

### Iceberg

The adapter supports table materialization for Iceberg.

> Take the following model as an example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example:
```

```sql
{{ config(
    materialized='table',
    table_type='iceberg',
    format='parquet',
    partitioned_by=['bucket(user_id, 5)'],
    table_properties={
     'optimize_rewrite_delete_file_threshold': '2'
     }
) }}

select 'A'          as user_id,
       'pi'         as name,
       'active'     as status,
       17.89        as cost,
       1            as quantity,
       100000000    as quantity_big,
       current_date as my_date
```

Iceberg supports bucketing as hidden partitions. Use the `partitioned_by` config to add specific bucketing
conditions.

> Iceberg supports several table formats for data : `PARQUET`, `AVRO` and `ORC`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Iceberg supports these table formats for data : `PARQUET`, `AVRO` and `ORC`.
```

> It is possible to use Iceberg in an incremental fashion, specifically two strategies are supported:

Reviewer: sugg starting with "You can..."

- `append`: New records are appended to the table (this can lead to duplicates).
- `merge`: Perform an update and insert (and optional delete), where new records are added and existing records are updated. Only available with Athena engine version 3.
  - `unique_key`(required): Columns that define a unique record in the source and target tables.
  - `incremental_predicates` (optional): SQL conditions that enable custom join clauses in the merge statement. This can
    be useful for improving performance via predicate pushdown on the target table.
  - `delete_condition` (optional): SQL condition used to identify records that should be deleted.
  - `update_condition` (optional): SQL condition used to identify records that should be updated.
  - `insert_condition` (optional): SQL condition used to identify records that should be inserted.
    - `incremental_predicates`, `delete_condition`, `update_condition` and `insert_condition` can include any column of the incremental table (`src`) or the final table (`target`). Column names must be prefixed by either `src` or `target` to prevent a `Column is ambiguous` error.

> 

Reviewer: the above lists currently have a "notes" vibe vs docs vibe. suggest using a different component to present these 2 strategies. maybe tabs, expandables, a table, or something. 

also, sugg checking them for grammar and style guidelines. i noticed some passive voice, etc

Author: The references for these adapters are more notes than docs. I've arranged the examples as tabs to give a better viewing experience of the examples, which will more thoroughly demonstrate these configurations. Hopefully that will help!

Example of `delete_condition`:

```sql
{{ config(
    materialized='incremental',
    table_type='iceberg',
    incremental_strategy='merge',
    unique_key='user_id',
    incremental_predicates=["src.quantity > 1", "target.my_date >= now() - interval '4' year"],
    delete_condition="src.status != 'active' and target.my_date < now() - interval '2' year",
    format='parquet'
) }}

select 'A' as user_id,
       'pi' as name,
       'active' as status,
       17.89 as cost,
       1 as quantity,
       100000000 as quantity_big,
       current_date as my_date
```

> `update_condition` example:

Reviewer: sugg for consistency with the other 2 examples

```suggestion
Example of `update_condition`:
```

```sql
{{ config(
        materialized='incremental',
        incremental_strategy='merge',
        unique_key=['id'],
        update_condition='target.id > 1',
        schema='sandbox'
    )
}}

{% if is_incremental() %}

select * from (
    values
    (1, 'v1-updated')
    , (2, 'v2-updated')
) as t (id, value)

{% else %}

select * from (
    values
    (-1, 'v-1')
    , (0, 'v0')
    , (1, 'v1')
    , (2, 'v2')
) as t (id, value)

{% endif %}
```

Example of `insert_condition`:

```sql
{{ config(
        materialized='incremental',
        incremental_strategy='merge',
        unique_key=['id'],
        insert_condition='target.status != 0',
        schema='sandbox'
    )
}}

select * from (
    values
    (1, 0)
    , (2, 1)
) as t (id, status)

```

> ### High availablity table (HA)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### High availability (HA) table
```

> The current implementation of table materialization can lead to downtime, as the target table is dropped and re-created. To have less destructive behavior, it's possible to use the `ha` config on your `table` materialized models. It leverages the table versions feature of the glue catalog, creating a temp table and swapping the target table to the location of the temp table. This materialization is only available for `table_type=hive` and requires using unique locations. For Iceberg, high availability is the default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current implementation of table materialization can lead to downtime, as the target table is dropped and re-created. For less destructive behavior, you can use the `ha` config on your `table` materialized models. It leverages the table versions feature of the glue catalog, which creates a temporary table and swaps the target table to the location of the temporary table. This materialization is only available for `table_type=hive` and requires using unique locations. For Iceberg, high availability is the default.
```

```sql
{{ config(
    materialized='table',
    ha=true,
    format='parquet',
    table_type='hive',
    partitioned_by=['status'],
    s3_data_naming='table_unique'
) }}

> select 'a'      as user_id,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
select 'a' as user_id,
```

Could we remove the spaces? I don't think we usually show sql like this

       'pi'     as user_name,
       'active' as status
union all
select 'b'        as user_id,
       'sh'       as user_name,
       'disabled' as status
```

> By default, the materialization keeps the last 4 table versions,but you can change it by setting `versions_to_keep`.

Reviewer: sugg moving this sentence to above the code block. feels like this could get lost in the scanning

#### HA known issues

- When swapping from a table with partitions to a table without (and the other way around), there could be a little
  downtime. If high performances is needed consider bucketing instead of partitions.
- By default, Glue "duplicates" the versions internally, so the last two versions of a table point to the same location.
- It's recommended to set `versions_to_keep` >= 4, as this will avoid having the older location removed.

> 

Reviewer: suggest checking the above list for grammar and other style guide nits

### Update glue data catalog

> Persist resource descriptions as column and relation comments to the glue data catalog, and meta as [glue table properties](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/glue/latest/dg/tables-described.html#table-properties) and [column parameters](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/glue/latest/webapi/API_Column.html). By default, documentation persistence is disabled, but it can be enabled for specific resources or groups of resources as needed.

Reviewer: i'm having a hard time reading and grokking the first sentence. sugg rewording to improve clarity 

sugg updating second sentence to be in active voice

Author: Yeah, I'm struggling here too. @amychen1776 Any ideas on how to clean this thought up?

Reviewer 2: Maybe something like this:

You can persist your column and model level descriptions to the Glue Data Catalog as [glue table properties](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/glue/latest/dg/tables-described.html#table-properties) and [column parameters](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/glue/latest/webapi/API_Column.html). To enable this, you will need to set the configuration to true as show below.

For example:

```yaml
models:
  - name: test_deduplicate
    description: another value
    config:
      persist_docs:
        relation: true
        columns: true
      meta:
        test: value
    columns:
      - name: id
        meta:
          primary_key: true
```

> See [persist docs](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/resource-configs/persist_docs) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to [persist_docs](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/resource-configs/persist_docs) for more details.
```

## Snapshots

> The adapter supports snapshot materialization. It supports both timestamp and check strategy. To create a snapshot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The adapter supports snapshot materialization. It supports both the timestamp and check strategies. To create a snapshot, create a snapshot file in the `snapshots` directory. You'll need to create this directory if it doesn't already exist.
```

> create a snapshot file in the snapshots directory. If the directory does not exist create one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Timestamp strategy

> To use the timestamp strategy refer to

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Refer to [Timestamp strategy](/docs/build/snapshots#timestamp-strategy-recommended) for details on how to use it. 

```

> the [dbt docs](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/snapshots#timestamp-strategy-recommended)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Check strategy

> To use the check strategy refer to the [dbt docs](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/snapshots#check-strategy)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to [Check strategy](/docs/build/snapshots#check-strategy) for details on how to use it.
```

> ### Hard-deletes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Hard deletes
```

> The materialization also supports invalidating hard deletes. Check

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The materialization also supports invalidating hard deletes. For usage details, refer to [Hard deletes](/docs/build/snapshots#hard-deletes-opt-in). 
```

> the [docs](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/snapshots#hard-deletes-opt-in) to understand usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ### Working example

Reviewer 2: Please delete the working example. I don't think we need it

```sql
{% snapshot model_snapshot_2 %}

{{
    config
    (
        unique_key='id',
        strategy='timestamp',
        updated_at='refresh_timestamp',
        invalidate_hard_deletes=True,
    )
}}
select *
from {{ ref('model') }} {% endsnapshot %}
```

check strategy - model_snapshot_3

```sql
{% snapshot model_snapshot_3 %}

{{
    config
    (
        unique_key='id',
        strategy='check',
        check_cols=['series_reference','data_value']
    )
}}
select *
from {{ ref('model') }} {% endsnapshot %}
```

### Snapshots known issues

- Incremental Iceberg models - Sync all columns on schema change can't remove columns used for partitioning. The only way, from a dbt perspective, is to do a full-refresh of the incremental model.
- Tables, schemas and database names should only be lowercase
- In order to avoid potential conflicts, make sure [`dbt-athena-adapter`](https://github.com/Tomme/dbt-athena) is not installed in the target environment.
- Snapshot does not support dropping columns from the source table. If you drop a column make sure to drop the column from the snapshot as well. Another workaround is to NULL the column in the snapshot definition to preserve history

> 

Reviewer: suggest checking the above bulleted list for grammar (like missing periods, etc) and other style guide nits (like contractions, etc)

## AWS Lake Formation integration

> The adapter implements AWS Lake Formation tag management in the following way:

Author: ```suggestion
The following is how the adapter implements AWS Lake Formation tag management:
```

> The following is how the adapter implements AWS Lake Formation tag management:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following describes how the adapter implements the AWS Lake Formation tag management:
```

> - You can enable or disable lf-tags management via [config](#table-configuration) (disabled by default)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Enable](#table-configuration) LF tags management with the `lf_tags_config` parameter. By default, it's disabled. 
```

> - Once you enable the feature, lf-tags will be updated on every dbt run

Reviewer: not sure what's the right way to write "lf tags". i've seen several on this page. would be helpful to see consistency

```suggestion
- Once enabled, LF tags are updated on every dbt run.
```

> - First, all lf-tags for columns are removed to avoid inheritance issues

Reviewer: should it be "LF tags" or "lf-tags"? 

```suggestion
- First, all lf-tags for columns are removed to avoid inheritance issues.
```

- Then, all redundant lf-tags are removed from tables and actual tags from table configs are applied
- Finally, lf-tags for columns are applied

> 

Reviewer: does it make sense to convert this above list into a paragraph instead? like in this example https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/deploy/continuous-integration#how-ci-works

Author: If it were a feature guide I'd agree, but since it's a ref page, I think it's optimal to keep it broken down.

It's important to understand the following points:

> - dbt does not manage `lf-tags` for databases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- dbt doesn't manage `lf-tags` for databases
```

> - dbt does not manage Lake Formation permissions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- dbt doesn't manage Lake Formation permissions
```

> That's why you should handle this by yourself manually or using an automation tool like terraform, AWS CDK, etc. You may find the following links useful to manage that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's why it's important to take care of this yourself or use an automation tool such as terraform and AWS CDK. For more details, refer to:
```

* [terraform aws_lakeformation_permissions](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/aws/latest/docs/resources/lakeformation_permissions)
* [terraform aws_lakeformation_resource_lf_tags](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/aws/latest/docs/resources/lakeformation_resource_lf_tags)

## Python models

The adapter supports Python models using [`spark`](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/athena/latest/ug/notebooks-spark.html).

### Setup

- A Spark-enabled workgroup created in Athena
- Spark execution role granted access to Athena, Glue and S3
- The Spark workgroup is added to the `~/.dbt/profiles.yml` file and the profile to be used
  is referenced in `dbt_project.yml`

> 

Reviewer: this setup section reads more like prerequisites to me. sugg refactoring this

- `timeout` (`default=43200`)
  - Time out in seconds for each Python model execution. Defaults to 12 hours/43200 seconds.
- `spark_encryption` (`default=false`)
  - If this flag is set to true, encrypts data in transit between Spark nodes and also encrypts data at rest stored locally by Spark.
- `spark_cross_account_catalog` (`default=false`)
  - When using the Spark Athena workgroup, queries can only be made against catalogs located on the same AWS account by default. However, sometimes you want to query another catalog located on an external AWS account. Setting this additional Spark properties parameter to true will enable querying external catalogs. You can use the syntax `external_catalog_id/database.table` to access the external table on the external catalog (For example, `999999999999/mydatabase.cloudfront_logs` where 999999999999 is the external catalog ID)
- `spark_requester_pays` (`default=false`)
  - When an Amazon S3 bucket is configured as requester pays, the account of the user running the query is charged for data access and data transfer fees associated with the query.
  - If this flag is set to true, requester pays S3 buckets are enabled in Athena for Spark.

> 

Reviewer: this is a bit dense. does it make sense to convert the above list into a table for easier scanning/reading?

### Spark notes

> - A session is created for each unique engine configuration defined in the models that are part of the invocation.

Reviewer: i'm not sure i understand what this sentence is saying. consider updating it for improved clarity

Author: Refactored

- A session's idle timeout is set to 10 minutes. Within the timeout period, if there is a new calculation (Spark Python model) ready for execution and the engine configuration matches, the process will reuse the same session.
- The number of Python models running at a time depends on the `threads`. The number of sessions created for the entire run depends on the number of unique engine configurations and the availability of sessions to maintain thread concurrency.

> - For Iceberg tables, it is recommended to use `table_properties` configuration to set the `format_version` to 2. This is to maintain compatibility between Iceberg tables created by Trino with those created by Spark.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For Iceberg tables, it's recommended to use the `table_properties` configuration to set the `format_version` to `2`. This helps maintain compatibility between Iceberg tables created by Trino with those created by Spark.
```

### Example models

> #### Simple pandas model

Reviewer: for each example in this section, suggest using an expandable

            "MaxConcurrentDpus": 3,
            "DefaultExecutorDpuSize": 1
        },
        spark_encryption=True,
        spark_cross_account_catalog=True,
        spark_requester_pays=True
        polling_interval=15,
        timeout=120,
    )

    data = [(1,), (2,), (3,), (4,)]

    df = spark_session.createDataFrame(data, ["A"])

    return df
```

#### Create pySpark udf using imported external python files

```python
def model(dbt, spark_session):
    dbt.config(
        materialized="incremental",
        incremental_strategy="merge",
        unique_key="num",
    )
    sc = spark_session.sparkContext
    sc.addPyFile("s3://athena-dbt/test/file1.py")
    sc.addPyFile("s3://athena-dbt/test/file2.py")

    def func(iterator):
        from file2 import transform

        return [transform(i) for i in iterator]

    from pyspark.sql.functions import udf
    from pyspark.sql.functions import col

    udf_with_import = udf(func)

    data = [(1, "a"), (2, "b"), (3, "c")]
    cols = ["num", "alpha"]
    df = spark_session.createDataFrame(data, cols)

    return df.withColumn("udf_test_col", udf_with_import(col("alpha")))
```

### Known issues in Python models

> - Python models cannot [reference Athena SQL views](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/athena/latest/ug/notebooks-spark.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Python models can't [reference Athena SQL views](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/athena/latest/ug/notebooks-spark.html).
```

> - Third-party Python libraries can be used, but they must be [included in the pre-installed list][pre-installed list] or [imported manually][imported manually].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You can use third-party Python libraries, however, they must be [included in the pre-installed list][pre-installed list] or [imported manually][imported manually].
```

> - Python models can only reference or write to tables with names meeting the regular expression: `^[0-9a-zA-Z_]+$`. Dashes and special characters are not supported by Spark, even though Athena supports them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Python models can only reference or write to tables with names meeting the regular expression: `^[0-9a-zA-Z_]+$`. Dashes and special characters are not supported by Spark, even though Athena supports them.
```
```suggestion
- Python models can only reference or write to tables with names matching the regular expression: `^[0-9a-zA-Z_]+$`. Spark doesn't support dashes or special characters, even though Athena supports them.
```

> - Incremental models do not fully utilize Spark capabilities. They depend partially on existing SQL-based logic which runs on Trino.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Incremental models don't fully utilize Spark capabilities. They depend partially on existing SQL-based logic that runs on Trino.
```

---
title: "Amazon Athena configurations"
description: "Reference guide for the Amazon Athena adapter for dbt Core and dbt Cloud."
id: "athena-configs"
---

## Models

### Table configuration

| Parameter | Default | Description |
|-----------|---------|-------------|
| `external_location` | None | The full S3 path to where the table is saved. It only works with incremental models. It doesn't work with Hive tables with `ha` set to `true`. |
| `partitioned_by` | None | An array list of columns by which the table will be partitioned. Currently limited to 100 partitions. |

> | `bucketed_by` | None | An array list of the columns to bucket data. Ignored if using Iceberg |

Author: ```suggestion
| `bucketed_by` | None | An array list of the columns to bucket data. Ignored if using Iceberg. |
```

- `data_cell_filters` management can't be automated outside dbt because the filter can't be attached to the table, which doesn't exist. Once you `enable` this config, dbt will set all filters and their permissions during every dbt run. Such an approach keeps the actual state of row-level security configuration after every dbt run and applies changes if they occur: drop, create, and update filters and their permissions.
- Any tags listed in `lf_inherited_tags` should be strictly inherited from the database level and never overridden at the table and column level.
- Currently, `dbt-athena` does not differentiate between an inherited tag association and an override it made previously.
   - For example,  If a `lf_tags_config` value overrides an inherited tag in one run, and that override is removed before a subsequent run, the prior override will linger and no longer be encoded anywhere (for example, Terraform where the inherited value is configured nor in the DBT project where the override previously existed but now is gone).

### Table location

> The saved location of a table is determined by the following conditions:

Author: ```suggestion
The saved location of a table is determined in precedence by the following conditions:
```

1. If `external_location` is defined, that value is used.
2. If `s3_data_dir` is defined, the path is determined by that and `s3_data_naming`.
3. If `s3_data_dir` is not defined, data is stored under `s3_staging_dir/tables/`.

The following options are available for `s3_data_naming`:

- `unique`: `{s3_data_dir}/{uuid4()}/`
- `table`: `{s3_data_dir}/{table}/`
- `table_unique`: `{s3_data_dir}/{table}/{uuid4()}/`
- `schema_table`: `{s3_data_dir}/{schema}/{table}/`
- `s3_data_naming=schema_table_unique`: `{s3_data_dir}/{schema}/{table}/{uuid4()}/`

> It's possible to set the `s3_data_naming` globally in the target profile, or overwrite the value in the table config or setting up the value for groups of model in dbt_project.yml.

Author: ```suggestion
It's possible to set the `s3_data_naming` globally in the target profile, overwrite the value in the table config, or set up the value for groups of the models in dbt_project.yml.
```

> Note: when using a workgroup with a default output location configured, `s3_data_naming` and any configured buckets are ignored and the location configured in the workgroup is used.

Author: ```suggestion
Note: If you're using a workgroup with a default output location configured, `s3_data_naming` ignores any configured buckets and uses the location configured in the workgroup.
```

### On schema change

The `on_schema_change` option reflects changes of the schema in incremental models. The values you can set this to are:

- `ignore` (default)
- `fail`
- `append_new_columns`
- `sync_all_columns`

To learn more, refer to [What if the columns of my incremental model change](/docs/build/incremental-models#what-if-the-columns-of-my-incremental-model-change).

### Iceberg

The adapter supports table materialization for Iceberg.

For example:

```sql
{{ config(
    materialized='table',
    table_type='iceberg',
    format='parquet',
    partitioned_by=['bucket(user_id, 5)'],
    table_properties={
     'optimize_rewrite_delete_file_threshold': '2'
     }
) }}

select 'A'          as user_id,
       'pi'         as name,
       'active'     as status,
       17.89        as cost,
       1            as quantity,
       100000000    as quantity_big,
       current_date as my_date
```

Iceberg supports bucketing as hidden partitions. Use the `partitioned_by` config to add specific bucketing
conditions.

Iceberg supports these table formats for data : `PARQUET`, `AVRO` and `ORC`.

> It is possible to use Iceberg in an incremental fashion, specifically two strategies are supported:

Author: ```suggestion
To use Iceberg incrementally, use one of the following supported strategies:
```

- `append`: New records are appended to the table (this can lead to duplicates).
- `merge`: Perform an update and insert (and optional delete), where new and existing records are added. It is only available with Athena engine version 3.
  - `unique_key`(required): Columns defining a unique source and target table record.
  - `incremental_predicates` (optional): SQL conditions that enable custom join clauses in the merge statement. This can
    help improve performance via predicate pushdown on the target table.
  - `delete_condition` (optional): SQL condition used to identify records that should be deleted.
  - `update_condition` (optional): SQL condition used to identify records that should be updated.

>   - `insert_condition` (optional): SQL condition used to identify records that should be inserted.

Author: ```suggestion
  - `insert_condition` (optional): SQL condition used to identify records that should be inserted.
```

>    - `incremental_predicates`, `delete_condition`, `update_condition` and `insert_condition` can include any column of the incremental table (`src`) or the final table (`target`). Column names must be prefixed by either `src` or `target` to prevent a `Column is ambiguous` error.

Author: ```suggestion
  - `incremental_predicates`, `delete_condition`, `update_condition` and `insert_condition` can include any column of the incremental table (`src`) or the final table (`target`). Column names must be prefixed by either `src` or `target` to prevent a `Column is ambiguous` error.
```

>     - `incremental_predicates`, `delete_condition`, `update_condition` and `insert_condition` can include any column of the incremental table (`src`) or the final table (`target`). Column names must be prefixed by either `src` or `target` to prevent a `Column is ambiguous` error.

Author: ```suggestion
   - `incremental_predicates`, `delete_condition`, `update_condition` and `insert_condition` can include any column of the incremental table (`src`) or the final table (`target`). Column names must be prefixed by either `src` or `target` to prevent a `Column is ambiguous` error.
```
